#CSC428 lecture 3

## Misc

We now go to tutorial rooms. Check the portal announcements for room postings.

`Proposal is due October 7 - that is next Wednesday by end of the day`

- Have a topic by the end of tutorial on this Wednesday

- Have a broad idea including are there papers out there? Any previous research?

- Bring a draft version on the 7th (next week) and show it to the TA. Get on the spot feedback.

No lecture on Oct 12 due to Thanksgiving.

## Last week

Main topic was about spatial relationships - natural versus learned.

Natural ones are congruent and maps directly to the action on the screen. Mouse to the right, cursor to the right.

To map perfectly for congruent actions, the number of degrees of freedom of the device must match the actual action.

For example, the mouse is limited to X and Z axis. On a screen, you want X and Y. So you map Z -> Y and keep X -> X. Use a hotkey to swap different axis on 3D software, for example.

Even if all the degrees can be mapped, sometimes a learning curve is present if it is a weird device. Like a 3d mouse.

## On to this week

The world we live in is 6 degrees. As soon as we talk about 3D interfaces, we need to have a device that supports 6 degrees. (X, Y, Z, as well as rotations around those axes)

#### CD Gain

Controller:Display gain. Ratio between what you do on the controller versus what you see. CD=2 means 2 cm on the mouse corresponds to 4cm of display movement.

If it is too fast, you will miss your target if trying to select or do something.

If too slow, you will "run out" of space on the trackpad or mouse to use.

Optimal setting is where positioning time is low (accuracy) and then the gain is actually somewhere inbetween Low/High.

There is a speed and accuracy tradeoff. It is an inverse relationship. Fast -> less accurate, Accurate -> slower

#### Lag

Latency (lag) can negatively impact UX. If it is something like virtual reality, and there is a delay between what someone does and what they see, it can induce motion sickness.

It is less noticible in stuff like cursor positioning or editing.

Our brain is very good at knowing "the world". We understand the constrains of a room i.e chairs don't float.

However, if it is an immersive experience, and there is a delay in feedback or a glitchy image, then there is a negative experience for the end user.

Even something small, in an example of a car simulator (where you sit in a real car and have displays for windows), even a slight delay in the accelerator or brakes have a difficult time after 20 minutes due to motion sickness.

#### Property sensed, order of control

Touch input is how we interact with phones. `Touch` itelf is important now. We interact directly with app buttons or sliders and not via a mouse.

These properties include position, displacement, and force. These are becoming more 1:1.

#### Joystick

Isometric (senses force applied to stick)
Isotonic (senses displacement)

These can be quite a learned experience. 

Examples given about learned relationships - property sense - versus what you think you are controlling on the display. 

Force applied -> position moved

#### Natural versus learned

Cultural cues can also impact things. Say you are used to knobs (like a sound dial) to control a slider. This actually maps Z-rotation to Y axis.

The lightbulb example in the slides was helpful. In the UK a lightbulb is mapped backwards to North America.

#### Mental models

Different people have different mental models. Consider a car mechanic versus a regular car driver. People's backgrounds now impact their interaction. If the interaction is "correct" - degrees of freedom, mapping, no lag, C:D is good - but if I expect a certain thing to happen, and it doesn't, this breaks my mental model.

#### Modes of interaction

Low degree of freedom on controller -> high degree of freedom on the display

An example of this is the caps lock key. It turns the alphabet into the ALPHABET with one key.

You can gain proficiency (pro gamers) and leverage modes to your benefit. But sometimes key combos can be really long and unuseful - there are tons in all of applicaitons you use that you never use.

`Mode visibility` is important. If 'a' key means one thing in one mode and a different thing in another mode, if you don't now which mode you are in, this can be a problem. Take the application vi for example. This can be addressed with a display showing what mode you are in.

More degrees of freedom != better input (consider the rockin' mouse)

#### Touch input

Trying to find a balance between accuracy and speed.

Multitouch can be difficult from an accessibility standpoint (4 finger swipe with 3 fingers). 

#### Accelerometer

Often maps to velocity. Now phones are isometric and isotonic. 

#### Interaction errors

The people-computer loop can be broken form a number of things. Mental model, lag, etc. Errors require recovery. UI can help recover from error. Undo, CTRL+ALT+DEL, etc. The less harsh the better.

#### Discard changes

Language and default options can be of importance. We usually default to yes, so if its a double negative or something then that can cause an unexpected action to happen. Consistency is important (mental model)

#### Helping the user

The next few slides (caps lock, advancing the field, scrolling) deal with examples that help a user for convenience.
